- [Voiceover] During the
Ice Age, mankind's nutrition
relied heavily on animal
meat and wild fruits.
But as the dry and cold
temperature eventually
depleted their resources,
early man had to search
for food alternatives, and
that was when the early men
of the Fertile Crescent
discovered that
they could not only
eat grass, they could also
grow it on a regular basis,
thus giving birth to
Western agriculture.
Wheat is the earliest known
crop to be cultivated.
It went through centuries
of cross-breeding
before producing the
variety commonly used today.
Scientists believe that this
cross-breeding commenced
in Turkey around 12,000 years
ago, when a grass called
"einkorn" cross-bred with
a wild goatgrass known
by the scientific name
"Aegilops speltoides,"
resulting in the
primitive wheat variety
called "emmer," or
"Triticum dicoccoides."
Emmer spread to the
Mediterranean region
of the Middle East,
and later on, to
different countries,
like Greece, Cyprus,
and India in 6,500 BC,
to Egypt in 6,000 BC, to
Germany and Spain in 5,000 BC,
to England and
Scandinavia in 3,000 BC,
and to China in 2,000 BC.
After some time, emmer
cross-bred with another
goatgrass with the scientific
name, "Aegilops squarrosa,"
producing the
variety durum wheat,
which is widely used
today to make pasta.
Durum re-crossed with some
of its parent species,
which gave birth to a
variety with bigger ears
and easy to remove husks,
the modern or common wheat.
Common wheat, or Triticum
aestivum, is the third
most important crop today,
following maize and rice.
Also known as bread wheat,
early known cultivation of this
variety took place in Greek
Macedonia around 1,350 BC.
It then crossed the
ocean to Mexico in 1520,
and to early English
colonies in the 1600s.
Common wheat can be
classified in three ways.
One, winter or spring.
Depending on geographical
location, it can be
sown either as a winter
or a spring crop.
Two, red or white.
Its bran color can indicate
strength and flavor,
red having more robust
flavor than white.
And third, as soft or hard.
Hard common wheat has more
gluten, which makes it
perfect for breads, while
soft common wheat has lesser
gluten, which accounts
for a lighter texture
perfect for cakes, cookies,
and other pastries.
Many consider common wheat
to be the most adaptable
of all the cereals, having
agronomic characteristics
suitable in a broader
range of soil conditions,
temperature, and precipitation.
Common wheat can grow
anywhere between the latitudes
30 and 60 degrees
north of the equator,
and between 27 and 40
degrees south of the equator.
It can tolerate temperatures
ranging from three degrees
Celsius to 32 degrees
Celsius, and thrives well
even at 4,500 meters
above sea level.
Most common wheat can tolerate
375 to 875 millimeters
of annual rainfall, but
it can still grow in areas
with a minimum rainfall
of 250 millimeters,
and a maximum rainfall
of 1,750 millimeters.
It's undeniable how wheat
contributed to the development
of agriculture, and by
extension, to the evolution
of mankind from nomad
creatures wandering the wild
to sociable human
beings building
communities and empires.
Maize, rice, and wheat are
the top three most important
and widely-produced
food crops in the world.
That's why their
nutritional values
and health benefits
are often compared.
Maize and rice have
their nutritional merits,
but a quick look at common
wheat's basic nutrient,
mineral, and vitamin
profile will show that
it can outshine maize
and rice in general.
Common wheat has the
highest protein content
among the three with 12.9 grams,
followed by maize with
9.4, and rice with 7.1.
It also leads in fiber
content with 12.2 grams,
compared to maize's
7.3, and rice's 1.3.
Fiber from whole wheat promotes
a healthy digestive system
by softening stools and
making waste excretion easier.
Health professionals prefer
that people suffering
from constipation increase
their fiber intake
instead of taking laxatives.
The daily fiber requirement
of adult males and females
is 38 grams and 25
grams respectively.
One cup of whole wheat
can already provide
half of these
fiber requirements.
Wheat bran, which contains
most of its fiber, is being
studied and linked to the
prevention of breast cancer.
Scientists believe that
elevated levels of estrogen
are a contributing
factor in the formation
of cancer cells in women.
Wheat bran can act as an
anti-carcinogenic agent
by enhancing the
metabolic rate of estrogen
and keeping it at
healthy levels.
With the exception of magnesium,
in which common wheat's
126 milligrams is
outperformed by maize's 127,
common what also
surpasses both crops
in basic mineral composition.
It has 29 milligrams of calcium,
3.19 milligrams of iron,
288 milligrams of phosphorus,
363 milligrams of potassium,
2.65 milligrams of zinc,
3.99 milligrams of manganese,
and an impressive 70.7
milligrams of selenium.
Its vitamin content is as
good as maize and rice.
It has 5.46
milligrams of niacin,
38 micrograms of folate,
1.01 milligrams of vitamin E,
and 1.9 micrograms
of vitamin K1.
Many medical studies are
now associating B vitamins
and vitamin E in maintaining
healthy cognitive
function and overall
mental condition.
The brain uses a lot
of oxygen to perform,
and vitamin E's antioxidant
properties can protect
its membranes during
the oxidation process,
thereby slowing,
if not stopping,
cognitive decline and
neuron degeneration.
Vitamin E's ability to combat
free radical cells and repair
damaged cells also protects
the body against harmful
environmental factors
such as cigarette smoke,
air pollution, and high
exposure to ultraviolet rays.
The niacin in common wheat
also reduces the risk
of atherosclerosis, or the
hardening of the arteries.
It helps by producing
histamine, which is
capable of dilating blood
vessels, and thereby
promoting efficient
blood circulation.
Selenium in common wheat
is extraordinarily high,
which women, especially
pregnant and breastfeeding
mothers, can take
advantage of to meet their
daily requirement of
55 to 70 micrograms.
There are also studies
showing that supplementing
pregnant women with selenium
can limit their chances
of developing
postpartum depression.
Like other grains,
refining common wheat
strips a lot of its nutrients,
so make sure that you
get food or use flour that is
made from 100% whole wheat.
Studies show that three servings
of whole grains per day,
wheat or other
grains like quinoa,
can reduce the risk
of heart disease,
type two diabetes, obesity,
colon and
hormone-related cancers.
It is undeniable that
ancient wheat had multiple
enormous impacts on
history, from the advent
of agriculture, to the
rise of the empires,
and the invention of
bread as we know it today.
The cultivation of common
wheat resulted in the invention
and development of
agriculture during the early
civilization, ending mankind's
wandering and initiating
the establishment of
small communities,
which later on expanded
into becoming great empires,
such as the Babylonian
and Assyrian empires.
Common wheat also paved
the way for the development
of leavened bread, due to
its high gluten content.
As more and more people
preferred leavened bread
made from wheat,
enhancements were integrated
in cultivation, production,
and bread-making.
Wind and water mills were
built near wheat fields,
crop rotation was introduced,
sieving was done to produce
finer flour, and improved
ovens were created, such
as the beehive and the pot.
Another noteworthy impact
of wheat in history
is how it transformed
bread-making into a real
business and trade,
thereby promoting bakers
from being slaves to free men.
Common wheat also had
a great economic impact
in the United States
during World War II.
There was an increased demand
for food, including wheat,
to supply armies fighting in
Europe, and authorities saw it
as an opportunity to generate
income and improve lives
of farmers by selling
commodities at
affordable prices.
Farmers, particularly
of the Great Plains,
had to increase production
of dairy products, eggs,
butter, cotton, and
of course, wheat.
By 1941, the majority
of wheat flour
was sold and
consumed by the Army.
Like in Roman times when
bakers were important men
in society, farmers too
were highly respected during
the war for their hard
work on the fields.
In the Netherlands, there's
a town called Stavoren.
During the Middle Ages,
Stavoren was one of the finest
harbors in Europe, until
a sandbank formed outside
the harbor, blocking any
ship from docking and doing
business in town, eventually
resulting in its downfall.
According to a Dutch
folktale, a rich woman called
Lady Stavoren ordered a sea
captain to find the most
precious thing in the
world as a wedding gift.
When the sea captain
returned with tons of wheat,
the Lady Stavoren
ordered that every
grain of it be
thrown in the water.
Heartbroken, the sea
captain left town,
never to be seen again, and
in the days that passed,
the discarded grains
sprouted and grew
and prevented the sands
from drifting away,
resulting in the
formation of a sandbank.
Another famous legend
involving wheat
is the legend of wheat
and the chessboard.
There are many versions of
this story, but the most famous
is the one where a prince
challenged a wise man
in a game of chess and lost.
For his prize, the wise man
asked the prince to give him
grains of wheat for every
square on the chess board,
each square containing
twice the amount
of wheat of the previous square.
At first, the prince
happily obliged,
but later on he realized
it was impossible for him
to fulfill his word,
because by the 20th square,
he needed to give the
wise man 1,480,575 grains,
and by the time they
reached the 64th square,
he should have given the
wise man enough grains
to cover the entire
earth in wheat.
It's a legend for most
people, but mathematicians
call it a mathematical
problem in the form
of a word problem, and it
is a very instructive way
to explain and grasp the
concept of exponential growth.
It can be said that wheat
helped change the world,
and as an important grain
today, as it was centuries ago,
it is exciting to think
of what it can still do
to shape a better
future for mankind.
Wheat is one of the first
cultivated grains in the world,
and when it was introduced,
either by force or natural
assimilation in
other civilizations,
it easily overthrew
other grains as a
staple crop, like quinoa
and amaranth in South America.
But people eventually accepted
wheat for its inherent
wonders, and today, it's
the third most important
crop in the world,
behind maize and rice.
The top five producers of common
wheat in the year 2012 were
China, with 120,580,000
metric tons,
India, with 94,880,000
the United States, with
61,755,240 metric tons,
France, with
40,300,800 metric tons,
and Russia, with
37,719,640 metric tons.
Australia, Canada,
Pakistan, Germany,
and Turkey round off the top 10.
The primary use of
common wheat is flour.
It typically comes
in three kinds.
Wholemeal flour, which
is made from 100% wheat,
brown flour, which contains
about 85% of the whole grain
because some of its
bran and wheat germ
have already been
processed, and white flour,
which has lost most of
its bran and wheat germ
during milling, leaving
only 75% of the whole grain.
Common wheat grain
also has non-food uses,
such as in biofuel production.
Along with maize, it is
being utilized in worldwide
efforts to create
alternative sources
of renewable energy,
like ethanol.
Since ethanol requires
carbohydrates from
plants to convert
into sugar, which is then
fermented and distilled,
common wheat is an ideal
plant for this purpose
because of its 71 grams of
carbohydrates per 100 grams.
Wheat required to make
ethanol must come from
high-yielding and
low-protein varieties.
Discarded parts of wheat, those
not intended for consumption
like the straw, are also
used in synthesizing ethanol.
Many countries are already
investing in biofuel
manufacturing, like
the United Kingdom,
which now has three
biofuel plants,
wherein wheat is a
major biofuel crop.
Not many people know
that the gluten extracted
from common wheat is also
used by pharmaceutical
companies to make capsules,
as well as by paper
manufacturers to coat
and make paper stronger.
Another interesting use
of wheat is substituting
plastic with wheat starch
to make eco-friendly
utensils like forks and knives.
After harvest,
wheat straw usually
ends up as fodder for livestock.
However, these discarded parts
have found a new purpose.
Wheat straw papers.
Several clean energy
companies have developed paper
made from a mixture of
wood pulp and wheat straw.
This innovation is considered
to bring positive effects
by giving farmers additional
income from waste products,
and contributing to
the preservation of
forests by providing
an alternative source of paper
fiber other than wood pulp.
For example, straw from wheat
harvested in Canada alone
can produce eight
million tons of pulp
that can be used to make
paper, saving almost
100 million trees a
year in the process.
Authorities have estimated
that food production
will increase by 60%
in 2050, and in order
to make wheat a sustainable
crop to feed 9 billion people
by that time, some believe
the way to make wheat
a sustainable crop is
through genetic enhancement.
Agencies from different
countries are partnering
to develop new and
climate-resilient
wheat varieties
that can aid food
security in the future.
In 2013, Australia and
India, with support from
the United States, started a
research project to develop
new climate-resilient
varieties of wheat and rice.
Scientists are hoping that
these varieties will sustain
food production in countries
in South Asia, Africa,
the Middle East, and North
America that are vulnerable
to drought due to climate
change and global warming.
Wheat and mankind have
been partners all along
in achieving breakthroughs
and innovations,
and it seems like that
alliance is destined
to endure in the years to come.
Wheat attained prominence
in history as flour,
having reinvented
bread across cultures.
These are different ways
to cook wheat berries.
To cook wheat berries
the conventional way,
rinse one cup of berries
and soak them overnight.
Rinse again before
putting them in a pot
with two and a
half cups of water.
Bring to a boil, and let simmer
for one to one and a half hours.
Now to cook it
using a rice cooker.
Just follow the same
procedure, and use
the same berries to water ratio.
Cooking wheat berries this way
will only take 45
minutes to one hour.
Let it sit and steam
cook for another
five minutes before serving.
Why not try these two
recipes using wheat berries
of the hard winter
wheat variety?
Recipe number one, wheat berry
and mixed vegetable soup.
Just prepare the
following ingredients.
One cup of wheat berries, one
tablespoon of extra-virgin
olive oil, two stalks
of thinly sliced celery,
one medium diced onion, one
medium thinly sliced leek,
one tablespoon of tomato paste,
eight cups of vegetable broth,
425 grams can of beans,
rinsed and drained,
one teaspoon of dried thyme,
one stem of fresh basil,
two large sliced carrots, and
four handfuls of baby spinach.
In a pan, heat oil and sauté
celery, onion, and leek.
Cover and cook it until
softened, about five minutes.
Add wheat berries
and tomato paste.
Combine well until
grains are coated.
Put the beans, thyme,
basil, and half
of the broth, and
bring it to a boil.
Simmer for 30 minutes.
Add the carrots and
the rest of the broth.
Cover again, and
cook over low heat
for 30 minutes, or until
carrots are tender.
Add spinach, remove
wilted basil,
season with salt and
pepper, and then serve.
Recipe number two, wheat
berry and tomato salad.
You will need one cup of wheat
berries, rinsed and soaked
for several hours, or overnight,
in four cups of water,
salt and freshly ground pepper,
two cups of diced tomatoes,
one tablespoon of
sherry vinegar,
one teaspoon of
balsamic vinegar,
one cup of diced celery or
cucumber or a combination,
three tablespoons of freshly
squeezed lemon juice,
three tablespoons of
extra-virgin olive oil,
one half cup of
crumbled feta cheese,
two tablespoons of
chopped fresh mint,
and three tablespoons of
chopped fresh parsley.
First, after soaking
the berries, transfer
both the berries
and soaking liquid
to a large saucepan.
You can add salt if you want,
then bring it to a boil.
Reduce heat and
simmer for one hour,
or until grains are tender.
Remove from heat. Let it sit
for 15 minutes, and then drain.
Second, put tomatoes in a bowl.
Sprinkle with salt, and then add
the sherry and
balsamic vinegars.
Combine well, and set aside.
Third, toss the drained wheat
berries with the tomatoes.
Let it marinate for
one hour, and then
add the rest of the ingredients.
Combine well and serve
at once, or you can
refrigerate it until
ready to serve.
Whole wheat has
more fiber, protein,
and minerals than
maize and rice.
That's why when looking for
a staple food source, wheat
is definitely one grain that
will be on top of the list.